## FAQ: Carbon Pricing
==============

by /u/Serialk

---

## Why do economists favor carbon taxes to fight climate change?

Today, carbon taxes are unanimously recommended
([\[1\]](http://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/carbon-tax)
[\[2\]](http://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/carbon-taxes-ii)) by economists as
an efficient way to fight climate change. To understand why, we need to look at
how they work.

Markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity, but in some
cases, they are prone to malfunctions, which are called [market
failures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_failure). By far the largest
example of such a failure is that market prices fail to take environmental
costs into account. That means every single economic transaction in the world
is based on incorrect information: the environmental cost component is missing
from the price. This kind of market failure is called a [negative
externality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Externality).

Actors who emit carbon dioxide impose a burden on society, but do not pay for
the consequences of their pollution. This means that if everyone acts in their
own self interest, there is no incentive for actors to change their behavior to
limit carbon emissions.
This is called the [tragedy of the
commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons).
However, if the market prices were corrected to reflect
all the environmental costs, and thereby putting a **price on carbon**, this
negative externality would disappear.

[Pigovian taxes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pigovian_tax) are the simplest
economic policy tool to achieve this carbon pricing.
They are a way of "internalising" negative externalities to correct
the market.  Taxing polluting firms for the environmental cost of their carbon
emissions forces the price of their products to [reflect the
burden](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_signal) on society of the emitted
carbon. This creates an incentive for firms and consumers to either consume
less of the carbon-intensive goods,
[substitute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitute_good) to low-carbon
goods, or to find more efficient, low carbon ways of producing and consuming.

Another carbon pricing system is
[cap and trade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emissions_trading), which is very
similar to carbon taxes. With cap and trade, there is a predetermined fixed
amount of carbon that can be emitted. Emission quotas are then put to auction,
and firms who need to emit carbon are required to buy them. Although they
differ in implementation, these policies are theoretically equivalent as they
both put a price on carbon to correct the market failure.

## Should carbon taxes be used to fund the energy transition?

No, not necessarily. By far the most common misconception about carbon taxes is
that their goal is to fund the [energy
transition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_transition) towards renewable
power. The idea behind this line of thinking is that to reduce carbon
emissions, governments have to massively subsidize clean energy sources, so
that it becomes possible to close fossil-fuel power plants and therefore reduce
emissions.
So, it might seem like if a government uses the revenue of a carbon tax for
other purposes, the tax is not effective and only serves as an excuse to tax
its citizens even more. For example, one of the main reasons for the sparking
of the
[Yellow Vests movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_vests_movement) in
France was the "suspicion that part of the tax is used to pay for something
other than the ecological transition"
[[1]](https://www.euractiv.com/section/energy/news/french-energy-transition-conferences-reopen-carbon-tax-debate/).

In reality, carbon taxes aren't a "necessary evil" to fund the solution to
climate change, they *are* a solution to climate change, in and of themselves.
Carbon taxes are *inherently good*, regardless of what you do with the extra
money. They don't care about the other side of the budget equation.
This is because of the market correction effect of Pigovian taxes: the main
mechanism by which they reduce emissions is by reducing demand for
carbon-intensive goods, and not necessarily by financing other solutions.

But once the market is corrected, couldn't we still allocate the tax revenue
for the energy transition?

There is empirical evidence that subsidies targeted at a particular abatement
method are far less efficient than carbon pricing
([\[1\]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1759-3441.12082)
[\[2\]](http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/news/eu-countries-focus-carbon-pricing-instead-subsidies-renewable/)).
This makes sense from an economic perspective: carbon pricing works
by "changing the rules" of the market, so that the most efficient solution
becomes the one that eliminates climate change. Policies that aim to
subsidize specific low-carbon goods have to therefore *beat the market* in some
way, which is hard to do as policymakers are not omniscient. When they fail to
do so, they can paradoxically reduce the efficiency of carbon pricing and
induce [deadweight loss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadweight_loss) in the
market.

## Is there a role for actions which are not a carbon tax?

Yes. Carbon pricing is one of the most important steps, but there is also a
need for other government interventions.

For the negative externality itself, once you have corrected the externalitiy
by internalizing the costs you do not need to do anything else. If the carbon
tax is not enough to fix the demand side, then it might just mean that the tax
level is not high enough. Instead of trying to increase its efficiency by using
its revenue e.g for funding renewables, it should be enough to just raise it to
a higher level.

That said, it doesn't mean that there is no room for other actions.
If there are other market failures besides the carbon externality, then we
might need other policy instruments to correct those.

In this case, the biggest example is R&D. Innovation is a public good that has
*positive externalities* on society: inventing a new carbon capture technology
benefits society as a whole, not only its creators. It's therefore perfectly
sensible to make grants for research projects that work on carbon abatement
technologies.

Another more practical problem is that carbon taxes are not very popular right
now. A lot of other policies (like tax credits, renewable power subsidies,
[RPS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renewable_portfolio_standard) or
[CES](https://www.rff.org/publications/issue-briefs/clean-energy-standards/))
are not as efficient as carbon pricing, but might become necessary if taxes are
not politically feasible.

## Aren't carbon taxes necessarily a burden on the poor? Aren't they going to create even more inequality?

Not if they are well implemented.

One of the cool properties of pigovian carbon taxes that is that they fix the
climate change problem in and of themselves, and the tax revenue can be used
for any purpose. If we redistribute this tax revenue to households, we can make
it so that the burden of the tax fall on society exactly the way we want! If
the tax is used to fund tax cuts to the rich then yes, it is likely that the
tax will be a huge burden on the poor. But if we redistribute the tax entirely
to the low-income households, it can actually reduce inequality.

This is why in 2019, more than 3500 economists signed a statement of the
[Climate Leadership Council](https://www.clcouncil.org) to advocate for a
system of **[carbon
dividends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fee_and_dividend)**, where the
entirety of the revenue raised from carbon taxes would be redistributed equally
to all households.  This system is thought to be
[progressive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_tax) (more beneficial
to the poor than the rich), by making the assumption that generally, rich
people consume more high-carbon goods than poor people. As the lump sum
"dividend" is the same for everyone, it is in essence a transfer from rich
households to poor households. Anyone emitting less carbon than the average
household (which includes most of the poor households) is getting back more
money than they paid initially.

The distributional impacts of carbon taxes have been studied empirically by
by the non-partisan environmental economics think tank Resources for the Future
(RFF). In a [research paper](https://www.rff.org/publications/working-papers/impacts-of-a-carbon-tax-across-us-household-income-groups-what-are-the-equity-efficiency-trade-offs/),
they find that a carbon dividend would not harm households in the lowest income
quintile.  This supports the idea that the tax can reduce emissions without
hurting low income households.

## But doesn't redistributing the carbon tax negate the incentives of emitting less carbon to pay less taxes?

No it does not, but the question is understandable. Indeed, if we directly redistribute
the tax to those who pay it, why would people try to reduce their
carbon emissions? If many people will be no worse off after the introduction of
a tax and dividend, why would they change their behavior?

The answer is simple: because the tax incentivizes them to. Here's a simple
example: If your grocery store increases the price of meat by $1, you will
be incented to *substitute*, for instance buying avocados instead.
If the store then gives $1 cash back to all of its customers, you would *still*
be incented to buy avocados and keep the extra $1, but you would be no
worse off if you decide to buy meat.

The key here is that in a carbon dividend system, people only pay for the
carbon their emit, but receive the lump sum dividend *unconditionally*. So,
even though you get a dividend of the carbon tax, you *still* save money when
you buy a low-carbon good.

## Are Carbon Taxes effective?

From the above points, we cannot directly conclude that carbon taxes work well
in practice. There might be a lot of different factors that mitigate how well
they reduce emissions in practice, for instance [inelasticity of
demand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_elasticity_of_demand): if people
don't have a choice to take their cars to go to work, the tax won't make people
drive less. So, what does the empirical literature tell us?

There is a growing amount of evidence that the taxes are very effective.
This has been observed for individuals' driving habits ([Gillingham,
Munk-Nielsen
(2019)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0094119018300779)).
but also in the electricity production sector ([Weigt, Ellerman, Delarue
(2013)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988313002089))
and in the manufacturing industry ([Martin, De Preux, Wagner
(2016)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047272714001078)).
Research also shows that firms subject to a carbon tax tend to reduce their
[energy intensity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_intensity), which
reduces their carbon emission but has little impact on the production or
employment levels.

While there may not always be readily available substitutions of
carbon-intensive goods, the incentives put in place by the carbon tax create a
demand in the market. This means that long term solutions, like better public
transportation systems, workplace flexibility regarding work from home,
electric cars etc. will become *profitable* for
politicians/employers/manufacturers, as there will be a demand to meet. For
instance, [Calel, Dechezleprêtre
(2016)](https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/REST_a_00470) found a 10%
increase of low-carbon innovations in firms that were subject to an European
emission trading system.

This is why objecting to carbon taxes because "alternatives are not available
yet" can be viewed as thinking backwards. The alternatives might not exist
because there's just not enough demand yet, and the carbon tax is a way to
create that demand.

## How high should the carbon tax be?

In theory, the way to find the appropriate level for a Pigovian tax is to
estimate the marginal damage caused by the externality it tries to correct.  In
other words, we need to find how much damage would be caused by emitting one
additional ton of carbon dioxide. This number is called the Social Cost of
Carbon (SCC).

It is pretty difficult to estimate the SCC. This is partly due to the fact that
the underlying physical processes and climate models are complex. Additionally,
the economic repercussions of specific levels of global warming are hard to
estimate. Currently, the accepted way of computing the SCC are Integrated
Assessment Models (IAMs), which can be used to build complex models integrating
these different factors. [This
post](https://www.reddit.com/r/badeconomics/comments/7bhrnb/the_fiat_discussion_sticky_come_shoot_the_shit/dpjsu32/)
by /u/Ponderay contains more details about IAMs and the lessons we learned from
them. Other good resources that look at estimating the economic damages of
carbon emissions are [Nordhaus and Moffat
(2017)](https://cowles.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/pub/d20/d2096.pdf),
[Auffhammer (2018)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.32.4.33), or
[this EPA fact
sheet](https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-12/documents/social_cost_of_carbon_fact_sheet.pdf).

One of the major decisions that need to be made to estimate the SCC is the
choice of [discount
rate](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/discountrate.asp). Carbon emissions
will have an impact for thousands of years, but cutting emissions costs us
money now. Choosing a *discount rate* answers the question of how we should
weight costs and benefits in the distant future.

The choice of the discount rate strongly affects the SCC, which can seem
arbitrary. Another approach is to use emission objectives: if we have a
specific objective in mind (let's say, limit global warming to 1.5°C) we can
compute its associated carbon tax from the price-demand elasticity of carbon.
[This
graph](https://www.reddit.com/r/dataisbeautiful/comments/aiggdt/oc_global_carbon_taxes_required_to_meet_various/)
by /u/raptorman556 shows the taxes required to meet various climate objectives,
as calculated by the Nobel prize winning economist [William
Nordhaus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Nordhaus).

## Can't we just aggressively regulate firms so that they stop polluting so much?

We could, but it is unlikely to be as effective as carbon pricing.

This kind of policies are called *command and control*: a set of arbitrarily
restrictive regulations that would forbid certain practices and enforce
specific ways of producing goods.

[Fowlie, Holland, Mansur (2009)](https://www.nber.org/papers/w15082)
specifically looked at how well command and control performed, with
emission pricing as a counterfactual, for reducing NOx emissions. They found
that on average, carbon pricing performed 24% better than command and control.
This makes some intuitive sense: carbon pricing realigns the incentives so that
firms *want* to pollute less to stay competitive. The market will tend to find
more efficient solutions than policymakers that have less information available
to them.

## Aren't carbon taxes a way for companies to buy a "right to pollute"?

Yes they are. This isn't necessarily a bad thing.

Firms are profit maximizers. Making companies buy a "right to pollute" both
increases their costs and reduces their competitiveness, which in turn reduces
their profits. That means companies are incentivized to buy as little "right to
pollute" as possible.

In essence, carbon taxes work *because* companies have to buy the right to
pollute, instead of being able to do it for free.

## Just 100 companies are responsible for 71% of global emissions: why don't we take the fight there instead?

This statistic is correct, but misleading without context. It comes from a
[2017
report](https://b8f65cb373b1b7b15feb-c70d8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcdd1d.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/documents/000/002/327/original/Carbon-Majors-Report-2017.pdf)
that lists 100 fossil fuel producers from which 71% of carbon emissions
*originated*. It includes the *use* of the fossil fuels produced.

That means if anyone fills up their car with gas coming from any of
these 100 companies, the emissions they produce while driving would be
accounted as part of this 71% figure. While the fuel is produced by large
companies, the residual actor responsible for the emissions is the end
consumer.

Evidently, "stopping" these 100 companies would just be forbidding the
production of fossil fuel. Ironically, this would be equivalent to an infinite
carbon tax. While some people might want that in the very long term, it is
obviously not a good transition plan.

## Won't companies just move their production to a country without a carbon tax?

Not with corrective *carbon tariffs*.

This is generally an important concern with trade. It is unlikely that all
countries would agree on a common carbon tax at the same time. As producers in
countries without carbon taxes wouldn't have to pay for their emissions, the
tax would harm the cost competitiveness of producers who have to pay it.

In theory, this could be solved by import tariffs proportional to the [embedded
carbon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embedded_emissions) of the imported
goods, although [some
concern](https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2017/02/17/are-carbon-tariffs-a-good-idea)
has been raised on the difficulty of estimating it accurately.

Ideally, as more and more markets adopt carbon taxes, the competitiveness issue
should be less and less prevalent. In the meantime, risking some deadweight
loss in trade to protect the competitiveness of local firms by approximating
"carbon tariffs" on certain goods will probably be the best way forward.

If a carbon tariff is not possible, regulated firms can still be protected from
unregulated competition with output based subsidies. These subsidies will help
firms stay in business against firms who do not pay for their carbon, and the
carbon tax will still encourage firms to cut down on their pollution.

---

Special thanks to /u/Ponderay and /u/VodkaHaze for their helpful reviews, and
/u/zzzzz94, /u/raptorman556 and /u/Integralds for the references.

License: CC-BY 4.0